docs: Adding Code rules page (#3915)
GEOS-DEV/GEOS: src/docs/sphinx/developerGuide/Contributing/CodeRules.rst

.. list-table:: GEOS Array Types
   :header-rows: 1
   :widths: 35 65

   * - GEOS Type
     - Description
   * - ``array1d<T>``
     - 1D owning array
   * - ``arrayView1d<T>``
     - 1D non-owning view (modifiable)
   * - ``arraySlice1d<T>``
     - 1D slice (from multi-dim array)
   * - ``array2d<T>``
     - 2D owning array
   * - ``arrayView2d<T>``
     - 2D non-owning view
   * - ``arraySlice2d<T>``
     - 2D slice
   * - ``array3d<T>``, ``array4d<T>``, ``array5d<T>``
     - 3D/4D/5D owning arrays
   * - ``arrayView3d<T>``, etc.
     - 3D/4D/5D views
   * - ``SortedArray<T>``
     - Sorted array with search capabilities
   * - ``ArrayOfArrays<T>``
     - Jagged 2D array (variable row sizes)
   * - ``ArrayOfSets<T>``
     - Array of sets (unique elements per row)
   * - ``stackArray1d<T, N>``
     - Stack-allocated array (max size N)

.. dropdown:: Example: Using GEOS arrays
   :icon: code

   .. code-block:: c++

      // BAD - Do not use std::vector
      std::vector<real64> values;

      // GOOD - Use GEOS arrays
      array1d<real64> values;
      arrayView1d<real64> valuesView = values.toView();
      arrayView1d<real64 const> constView = values.toViewConst();

> 

Reviewer: I don't understand with this code the benefits of GEOS array over std array

Author: I added precisions to the comments

     - 3D/4D/5D owning arrays
   * - ``arrayView3d<T>``, etc.
     - 3D/4D/5D views
   * - ``SortedArray<T>``
     - Sorted array with search capabilities
   * - ``ArrayOfArrays<T>``
     - Jagged 2D array (variable row sizes)
   * - ``ArrayOfSets<T>``
     - Array of sets (unique elements per row)
   * - ``stackArray1d<T, N>``
     - Stack-allocated array (max size N)

.. dropdown:: Example: Using GEOS arrays
   :icon: code

   .. code-block:: c++

      // BAD - Do not use std::vector for data that can be packed or kernel addressable
      std::vector<real64> values;
      std::array<integer, 10> fixedData;

      // GOOD - Use CHAI managed arrays for kernels
      array1d<real64> values;
      arrayView1d<real64> valuesView = values.toView();
      arrayView1d<real64 const> constView = values.toViewConst();
      stackArray1d<integer, 10> fixedData;

Tensor Types
^^^^^^^^^^^^

Use GEOS tensor types for geometric and mechanical calculations:

.. list-table:: GEOS Tensor Types
   :header-rows: 1
   :widths: 30 70

   * - Type
     - Description
   * - ``R1Tensor``
     - 3D vector (real64)
   * - ``R1Tensor32``
     - 3D vector (real32)
   * - ``R2SymTensor``

>      - Symmetric 6-component tensor (Voigt notation)

Reviewer 2: I feel like we can expand a bit on why tensor are in use and not their vector counter part

Author: Do you have a suggestion? I have an idea but I think not precise enough.

Author: Added a reference to wikipedia article, as we discussed of it in person, I suppose it is resolved.

------------------------

It is possible to use ``std`` library components for data on host memory, for doing so, the rule is 
to **only use GEOS ``std`` container wrappers** instead of direct standard library containers.

This rule allow us to control bounds checking depending on ``GEOS_USE_BOUNDS_CHECK`` macro / ``GEOS_ENABLE_BOUNDS_CHECK`` cmake option..

   * - Standard C++ Type
     - GEOS Type
     - Description
   * - ``std::vector``
     - ``stdVector``
     - ``std`` dynamically allocated array
   * - ``std::array``
     - ``stdArray``
     - ``std`` fixed constexpr sized array
   * - ``std::map``
     - ``map``
     - ``std`` sorted dictionary
   * - ``std::unordered_map``
     - ``unordered_map``
     - ``std`` unsorted dictionary (hash-map)

.. dropdown:: Example: Container usage
   :icon: code

   .. code-block:: c++

      // BAD - Direct std containers
      std::vector<real64> data;
      std::array<integer, 10> fixedData;
      std::map<string, real64> orderedMap;
      
      // GOOD - GEOS wrappers
      stdVector<real64> data;
      stdArray<integer, 10> fixedData;
      map<string, real64> orderedMap;

The following standard library components are allowed:

> - ``std::pair``, ``std::tuple`` for temporary structures, but beware of memory allocation, sometimes struct are to prefer.

Reviewer 2: Maybe an example on this specific point can help user

Reviewer 2: Great example !!

- ``std::function`` for callbacks
- ``std::optional`` for optional return values
- ``std::move``, ``std::forward`` for move semantics
- Algorithms from ``<algorithm>`` where appropriate
- ``std::unique_ptr``, ``std::shared_ptr`` for memory management

Contribution
============

Documentation
-------------

Always Provide Comprehensive Documentation
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

All new features must include appropriate documentation at multiple levels:

Wrapper Documentation (User-Oriented)
""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""

All data repository wrappers must be documented with ``setDescription()``.
As much as possible, valid values rules should be provided, and default values should be provided with ``setApplyDefaultValue()``.

.. dropdown:: Example: Wrapper documentation
   :icon: code

   .. code-block:: c++

      registerWrapper( "timeStep", &m_timeStep ).
        setInputFlag( InputFlags::REQUIRED ).
        setApplyDefaultValue( 1.0e-6 ).
        setDescription( "Initial time step value. This parameter controls "
                        "the starting time increment for the simulation. "

>                         "Valid range: (0, 1e-3]. See User Guide Chapter 5." );

Reviewer 2: For later, should we think of adding an optional  `setRange` to Wrappers ?

Author: I totally agree, along with "unit" type. This is the direction I want to promote.

Author: created a task for it

RST Documentation (User Guide)
"""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""

User-facing features must be documented in the Sphinx RST documentation (``src/docs/sphinx/``):

- Explain **what** the feature does
- Provide **usage examples**
- Document **input parameters**
- Include **expected output** or behaviour
- Add **references** to related features

Doxygen & Naming (Developer-Oriented)
""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""

> Keep Doxygen comments and naming as clear as possible. Keep in mind that it is target to developers from other domains.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Keep Doxygen comments and naming as clear as possible. Variable names and inline comments should provide help for developers even if they are not experts in the domain.
```

.. dropdown:: Example: Doxygen documentation
   :icon: code

   .. code-block:: c++

>       // GOOD - Documentation that gives useful information about what the function *does*, without

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
      // GOOD - The documentation gives useful information about what the function *does*, without
```

      //        going into theorical knowledge nor implementation details.
      /**
       * @brief Computes the residual for the nonlinear solver.
       * @param[in] domain The domain partition containing mesh and field data
       * @param[in] time Current simulation time
       * @param[in] dt Time step size
       * @param[out] residual The computed residual vector
       * @return Residual L2 norm
       * 
       * This method assembles the discrete residual for the physics equations
       * by looping over all elements in the target regions. The residual is
       * stored in the provided vector and its L2 norm is returned.
       */
      real64 computeResidual( DomainPartition & domain,
                              real64 const time,
                              real64 const dt,
                              arrayView1d<real64> const & residual );

>       // BAD - Documentation does not tell anything about the point of this function.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
      // BAD - The documentation does not provide useful information beyond the function name
```

      /**
        * @brief Compute CFL numbers
        * @param[in] time current time
        * @param[in] dt the time step size
        * @param[in] domain the domain partition
        */
      void computeCFLNumbers( real64 const time,
                              real64 const dt,
                              DomainPartition & domain ) const;

Testing
-------

Unit Tests
^^^^^^^^^^

> **Always provide unit tests** to ensure code behaves according to expectations.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
**Always provide unit tests** to ensure every function behaves according to expectations.
```

> Unit testing is not about testing every single line of code (an unrealistic goal), but about *verifying assumptions and preventing regressions*. Don't assume your code works as intended—prove it with tests.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Unit testing is not about testing every single line of code (an unrealistic goal), but about *verifying assumptions and preventing regressions*. Do not assume that your code will always work as intended—protect it with unit tests.
```

- Focus on **critical logic** (core functionality and algorithms), **edge cases** (extreme, erroneous, empty values).
- **Use GoogleTest framework**.
- In GEOS, the goal of unit test is never to take position on the validity of physical results (this is the point of integrated-tests).
- Place tests in ``src/coreComponents/<component>/tests/``.

> - Test GPU code paths if applicable (use ``#ifdef GEOS_USE_DEVICE``).

Reviewer 2: Would look nice in the example too

Author: Added

.. dropdown:: Example: Unit test structure
   :icon: code

   .. code-block:: c++

      #include <gtest/gtest.h>
      
      // Test core functionality
      TEST( MyComponentTest, ComputesCorrectResult )
      {
        MyComponent component;
        EXPECT_DOUBLE_EQ( component.compute( 2.0 ), 4.0 );
      }
      
      // Test edge case
      TEST( MyComponentTest, HandlesZeroInput )
      {
        MyComponent component;
        EXPECT_DOUBLE_EQ( component.compute( 0.0 ), 0.0 );
      }
      
      // Test error detection
      TEST( MyComponentTest, RejectsInvalidInput )
      {
        MyComponent component;
        EXPECT_THROW( component.compute( -1.0 ), std::invalid_argument );
      }

      // entry point of the test binary
      int main( int argc, char * * argv )
      {
        ::testing::InitGoogleTest( &argc, argv );
        g_commandLineOptions = *geos::basicSetup( argc, argv );
        int const result = RUN_ALL_TESTS();
        geos::basicCleanup();
        return result;
      }

Code Coverage
^^^^^^^^^^^^^

**Code coverage should never decrease.** New code contributions must maintain or improve overall code coverage.

> Use code-cov reports to identify untested code paths.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Use code-cov to report untested code paths.
```

> Integrated Tests & examples

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Integrated Tests & Examples
```

^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

> **Every XML-usable & serializable component must have examples (at least, have an integrated-test case):**

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
**Always provide an example or an integrated test for every XML-usable & serializable component:**
```

> - Each different usage pattern requires its own example,

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
- Each usage pattern should have its own dedicated example,
```

> - Examples must be ran as integrated tests to guaranty they keep valid,

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
- Examples must run as part of the integrated tests to protect features against regressions,
```

- Place examples in ``examples/`` directory, and integrated tests in ``inputFiles/``,

For more info, please refer to :ref:`IntegratedTests.rst`.

Logging
=======

Rules
-----

> Use GEOS Logging Macros (``GEOS_LOG*``)

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Using GEOS Logging Macros (``GEOS_LOG*``)
```

Author: @herve-gross I removed the "Use" / "Using", ok?

^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

**Use of ``std::cout``, ``std::cerr``, or ``printf`` for logging must never appear** on the develop branch.
Always use GEOS logging macros defined in ``Logger.hpp``:

.. dropdown:: Example: Correct logging usage
   :icon: code

   .. code-block:: c++

      // BAD - Do not use
      std::cout << "Starting simulation" << std::endl;
      printf("Value = %f\n", value);

      // GOOD - Use GEOS macros
      GEOS_LOG("Starting simulation");
      GEOS_LOG_RANK_0("Master rank initialization complete");

**Available logging macros:**

- ``GEOS_LOG(...)`` - Log on all ranks
- ``GEOS_LOG_VAR(...)`` - Log variable name and value
- ``GEOS_LOG_IF(condition, msg)`` - Conditional logging
- ``GEOS_LOG_RANK_0(msg)`` - Log only on rank 0 (MPI master)
- ``GEOS_LOG_RANK_0_IF(condition, msg)`` - Conditional logging on rank 0
- ``GEOS_LOG_RANK(msg)`` - Log to rank-specific output stream
- ``GEOS_LOG_RANK_VAR(var)`` - Log variable on rank stream

> Use Log Levels

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Using Log Levels
```

.. dropdown:: Example: Using log levels
   :icon: code

   .. code-block:: c++

      // physics solver cpp - effective logging
      GEOS_LOG_LEVEL_RANK_0( logInfo::Convergence,
                             GEOS_FMT( "Newton iteration {}: residual = {:4.2e}",
                                       iter, residual ) );

      // src/coreComponents/physicsSolvers/LogLevelsInfo.hpp - convergence logging config
      struct Convergence
      {
        static constexpr int getMinLogLevel() { return 1; }
        static constexpr std::string_view getDescription() { return "Convergence information"; }
      };

.. dropdown:: Example: Avoiding log spam
   :icon: code

   .. code-block:: c++

      // BAD - Will spam output for every element on every ranks
      forAll< parallelDevicePolicy<> >( numElems, [=] GEOS_HOST_DEVICE ( localIndex const ei )
      {
        GEOS_LOG("Processing element " << ei); // DO NOT DO THIS
      });

      // GOOD - Log summary information
      GEOS_LOG_RANK_0(GEOS_FMT("Processed {} elements", numElems));

Logging in RAJA Kernels
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

> **Logging inside RAJA kernels only for DEBUG purposes** and must never appear on the develop branch.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
**Logging inside RAJA kernels should only be done for debugging purposes** and must never appear on the develop branch.
```

                                      getName(), fluxesStr );
        string const multilineTitle = wrapTextToMaxLength( title, 80 ); // enabling automatic line wrapping
        m_logLayout.setTitle( multilineTitle );
        TableTextFormatter const tableStatFormatter( m_logLayout );
        GEOS_LOG_RANK( tableStatFormatter.toString( statsData ) );
      }

.. dropdown:: Example: CSV output
   :icon: code

   .. code-block:: c++

      // CSV output preparation, layout precomputation can be kept for periodic outputs
      TableLayout const statsCSVLayout( "", {"Time [s]", "Flux(es)", "Region", "Element Count", massColumn, rateColumn} );
      m_csvLayout = statsCSVLayout;

      // filling table data (CSV format is all timestep series)
      m_csvData.addRow( wrappedStats.getStatsPeriodStart(),
                             fluxName,
                             elementSetName,
                             wrappedStats.stats().m_elementCount,
                             wrappedStats.stats().m_producedMass,
                             wrappedStats.stats().m_productionRate );

      // statistics CSV output (only if enabled and from rank 0)

>       if( m_writeCSV > 0 && MpiWrapper::commRank() == 0 )

Reviewer 2: Why not wrap this in a MACRO and advise to use it ?

Author: Created a task to work on that.

      {
        std::ofstream outputFile( m_csvFilename );
        TableCSVFormatter const tableStatFormatter( m_csvLayout );

>         outputFile << tableStatFormatter.toString( csvData );

Reviewer 2: Probably a side not, but it is confusing that std's `operator<<` is used here while unadvised (generally speaking) elsewhere, but the answer is probably in the code not in the doc

Author: `operator<<` as been used here because of a choice of mine, after benchmarks: unalike a lot of string concataination, it was way more performant to use streams here than pure string concatenation, because of their volume.

        outputFile.close();
        csvData.clear();
      }

Error Management
================

- **Developpers must provide runtime validations** of their code behaviour,

> - for runtime validation fails that can be encountered by users, **meaningful messages and context must be provided**.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
- For runtime validation fails that can be triggered by users, **meaningful messages and context must be provided** to help troubleshooting.
```

  * - ``geos::BadTypeError`` 
    - Type conversion errors
  * - ``geos::NotAnError``
    - Non critical, volontary stopping state

.. dropdown:: Example: Throwing exceptions
   :icon: code

   .. code-block:: c++

      // Example 1: throw with context
      GEOS_THROW_IF( !file.is_open(),
                     GEOS_FMT("Cannot open file {}", filename),
                     InputError );

      // Example 2: rethrow with context info (because of unclear exception)
      try
      {
        tolerance = stod( inputParams[8] );
      }
      catch( const std::invalid_argument & e )
      {
        GEOS_THROW( GEOS_FMT( "{}: invalid model parameter value: {}", functionName, e.what() ), 
                    InputError, getDataContext() );
      }

Never Catch and Continue
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

**Do not catch exceptions and continue execution**. Exceptions in GEOS indicate serious problems, they
do not serve as an alternative code path to consult a behaviour state.

**Rationale:**

- **Performance:** Exception handling is expensive, especially with stack unwinding,
- **Predictability:** Catching and continuing makes behaviour unpredictable and hard to debug,

> - **Safety:** The error state may have corrupted simulation data, broke the code path at an unexpected place, and/or left the system in an invalid state.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
- **Safety:** The error state may have corrupted simulation data, broken the code path at an unexpected place, and/or left the system in an invalid state.
```

.. dropdown:: Example: Exception handling anti-pattern
   :icon: code

   .. code-block:: c++

      // BAD - Do not catch to continue
      // Here, the "solver" should have a "isFailed" flag or a returned resulting state
      try
      {
        solver.solve();
      }
      catch( std::exception const & e ) // <- Note: this exception could have been throw for unexpected reason
      {
        GEOS_LOG("Solver failed, trying alternative");
        alternativeSolver.solve();
      }

      // GOOD - Manage your code paths manually
      if(! solver.solve() )
      {
        GEOS_LOG("Solver failed, trying alternative");
        alternativeSolver.solve();
      }

Warnings (GEOS_WARNING*)
------------------------

Why Use Warnings?
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Use ``GEOS_WARNING*`` macros when:

- An issue is detected but **simulation can continue**

> - Simulation may be **affected but not completly invalid**

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
- Simulation may be **affected but outcomes remain valid**
```

Author: I'm not sure of what to write here.
Here is my understanding of warnings in GEOS: _We know that there may be an issue, but simulation can continue to proceed, and results may be right._

> - User should be notified of a **potential problem**

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
- The user should be notified of a **potential problem**
```

.. dropdown:: Example: Warning usage
   :icon: code

   .. code-block:: c++

      // Example: suboptimal but valid configuration
      GEOS_WARNING_IF( dt > recommendedDt,
                       GEOS_FMT("Time step {} exceeds recommended value {}. This may affect solution accuracy.",
                                dt, recommendedDt),
                       getDataContext() );

Errors & Warning in RAJA Kernels
--------------------------------

> Same rule as logging: **Error and warning output inside RAJA kernels only for DEBUG purposes** and must never appear on the develop branch.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Similarly to Logging, **error and warning output inside RAJA kernels is only for debugging purposes** and must never appear on the develop branch.
```

- GPU kernel errors cause immediate kernel termination, adding potentially costly branches,

> - Error handling on device has significant performance & cache impact,

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
- Error handling on device has significant performance and cache impact,
```

- GPU error handling may be unsupported depending on the platform / device,

> - Can cause deadlocks in parallel execution.

Reviewer 2: If there exists a canonical example of that, would be a good illustration :-)

Author: Added a reference.

                               getDataContext(), fluid.getDataContext() ),
                     InputError, getDataContext(), fluid.getDataContext() );

Parallelism
===========

RAJA Kernels / CHAI Memory
---------------------------

Do Not Launch Kernels from Within Kernels
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

**Never launch RAJA kernels from within other RAJA kernels.** This causes portability issues and is not supported on GPU.

.. dropdown:: Example: Nested kernel anti-pattern
   :icon: code

   .. code-block:: c++

      // BAD - Do not nest kernels
      forAll<parallelDevicePolicy<>>( n, [=] GEOS_HOST_DEVICE ( localIndex i )
      {
        forAll<parallelDevicePolicy<>>( m, [=] GEOS_HOST_DEVICE ( localIndex j )
        {
          // ...
        });
      });
      
      // GOOD - Use nested loops or restructure algorithm
      forAll<parallelDevicePolicy<>>( n, [=] GEOS_HOST_DEVICE ( localIndex i )
      {
        for( localIndex j = 0; j < m; ++j )
        {
          // ...
        }
      });

CHAI Memory Management
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

GEOS uses CHAI for **automatic kernel memory migration**. Follow these rules:

> - **Use CHAI-managed arrays:** ``array1d``, ``array2d``, etc.

Reviewer 2: if possible cross ref previous section

Reviewer 2: And complement with discussion on using `ArrayViews` to handle automatically mem transfer

.. dropdown:: Example: MPI collective operations
   :icon: code

   .. code-block:: c++

      // BAD - only rank 0 calls MPI_AllReduce() - DEADLOCK!
      if( MpiWrapper::commRank() == 0 )
      {
        MpiWrapper::allReduce( ... );
      }

      // BAD - some ranks may have this condition to false - not every ranks call MPI_Allreduce - DEADLOCK!
      if( localWellElementsCount > 0 )
      {
        MpiWrapper::allReduce( ... ); // WRONG - other ranks waiting!
      }

      // GOOD - All ranks participate, even if they may not have influence in the result
      real64 localSum = computeLocalSum();
      real64 globalSum = MpiWrapper::allReduce( localSum );
      
      // GOOD - Conditional execution AFTER collective operation
      real64 globalSum = MpiWrapper::allReduce( localSum );
      if( MpiWrapper::commRank() == 0 )
      {
        GEOS_LOG_RANK_0( GEOS_FMT("Global sum = {}", globalSum) );
      }

Always Use MpiWrapper
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

**Always use ``MpiWrapper`` instead of raw MPI calls.**
Refer to ``MpiWrapper.hpp`` for more.

.. dropdown:: Example: Using MpiWrapper
   :icon: code

   .. code-block:: c++

      // BAD - Raw MPI calls
      int rank;

>       MPI_Comm_rank( MPI_COMM_WORLD, &rank );

Reviewer 2: This will be a good addition to CI code rules checks #3914

Author: Created a task.

      MpiWrapper::barrier();
      
      // Common patterns
      real64 globalMax = MpiWrapper::max( localValue );
      real64 globalSum = MpiWrapper::sum( localValue );
      MpiWrapper::allGather( sendBuf, recvBuf, count );

Communication Batching
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

**Rule: Batch Small Communications**
  Combine multiple small messages into larger ones to reduce communication overhead.

  **Rationale:** MPI has significant per-message overhead; batching improves performance.

  .. code-block:: cpp

    // WRONG - many small communications
    void sendDataInefficiently( arrayView1d< real64 const > const & data,
                                int const destination )
    {
      for( localIndex i = 0; i < data.size(); ++i )
      {
        MpiWrapper::send( &data[i], 1, destination, tag + i );  // N messages!
      }
    }
    
    // CORRECT - single batched communication
    void sendDataEfficiently( arrayView1d< real64 const > const & data,
                              int const destination )
    {
      MpiWrapper::send( data.data(), data.size(), destination, tag );  // 1 message
    }

Validation / Precision
======================

> Computation validation

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Computation Validation
```

-----------------------

Use Tolerance-Based Comparisons
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

**Always consider proper tolerance** for floating-point numbers comparisons, taking into account rounding errors, even for extreme values.

.. dropdown:: Example: Correct float comparison
   :icon: code

   .. code-block:: c++

      // BAD - Direct comparison
      if( value == 1.0 ) { ... }
      if( a == b ) { ... }

      // GOOD - Absolute tolerance
      real64 const absTol = 1.0e-12;

>       if( std::abs(value) < absTol ) { ... }

Reviewer 2: `std::fabs` ?

Reviewer 2: Shouldn't we use `LvArray::math::abs` instead ?

      // GOOD - Relative tolerance
      real64 const relTol = 1.0e-8;
      real64 const scale = std::max( std::abs(a), std::abs(b) );
      if( std::abs(a - b) < relTol * scale ) { ... }

> Division Safety, NaN/Inf values

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Division Safety, NaN/Inf Values
```

^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

> - **Always verify denominators are not zero or near-zero before division**.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
- **Always verify that denominators are not zero or near-zero before a division**.
```

   :icon: code

  .. code-block:: cpp

    // WRONG - unprotected division
    real64 const normalizedResidual = residual / initialResidual;
    real64 const strainRate = velocityGradient / thickness;

    // CORRECT - protected division
    real64 computeNormalizedResidual( real64 const residual, 
                                      real64 const initialResidual )
    {
      if( initialResidual > machinePrecision )
        return residual / initialResidual;
      else
        return residual;  // or return a flag indicating special case
    }

    // CORRECT - with error reporting
    real64 safeDivide( real64 const numerator, 
                       real64 const denominator,
                       string const & context )
    {
      GEOS_ERROR_IF( LvArray::math::abs( denominator ) < machinePrecision,
                     GEOS_FMT( "Division by zero in {}: denominator = {:.2e}", 
                              context, denominator ) );
      return numerator / denominator;
    }

Overflow Prevention
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Overflow leads to undefined behavior and memory corruption.

**Validate that operations won't exceed type limits**, especially for index calculations.

> 

Reviewer 2: This is general advise to all scientific programming (if not more). Maybe should be in another doc ?

Author: Overflow and Division checks? 
- Division check `safeDivision()` function needs to be accessible everywhere and enforce anytime it is needed. It is a decision to forbid unsafe division, and so it should be in these rules,
- Overflow control seems similar to me, but don't have dedicated validating functions, what do you think?

Author: as the document will be separated in two part, it will address your comment

.. dropdown:: Example: Post-input validation
   :icon: code

   .. code-block:: c++

      void MyClass::postInputInitialization()
      {
        // Call parent first
        Base::postInputInitialization();
        
        // Validate individual parameters
        GEOS_THROW_IF_LT( m_timeStep, 0.0,
                          "timeStep must be positive",
                          InputError, getDataContext() );
        
        // Validate cross-parameter constraints
        GEOS_THROW_IF( m_endTime <= m_startTime,
                       "endTime must be greater than startTime",
                       InputError, getDataContext() );
        
        // Validate against other components
        GEOS_THROW_IF( !hasRequiredSolver(),
                       "Required solver not found in configuration",
                       InputError, getDataContext() );
      }

Additional Validation Guidelines
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

- Use ``setInputFlag()`` to mark parameters as ``REQUIRED`` or ``OPTIONAL``
- Use ``setApplyDefaultValue()`` to provide sensible defaults
- Use ``setRTTypeName()`` for runtime type validation (e.g., ``rtTypes::CustomTypes::positive``)

> - Document valid ranges in ``setDescription()``

Reviewer 2: Shouldn't it be in the Wrapper section ?

Author: It feels strange to me, as the wrapper section is for documentation requirement. My goal here is to precise validation rules. What do you think?

Performance
===========

Profiling
---------

> Profile When Affecting Kernel behaviour

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Profile When Affecting Kernel Behaviour
```

^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

When modifying performance-critical code (kernels, assembly loops, solvers):

1. **Use Caliper profiling** on representative test cases before changes
2. **Measure performance** after changes
3. **Document performance impact** in pull request description

.. dropdown:: Example: Performance profiling workflow
   :icon: code

   .. code-block:: bash

      # Profile before changes
      geos -i test_case.xml --caliper-output=baseline.cali
      
      # Make code changes
      
      # Profile after changes
      geos -i test_case.xml --caliper-output=modified.cali
      
      # Compare results
      cali-query -q "SELECT time.duration WHERE annotation='myKernel'" baseline.cali
      cali-query -q "SELECT time.duration WHERE annotation='myKernel'" modified.cali

Caliper Integration
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

> Use ``GEOS_MARK_FUNCTION`` and ``Timer`` for performance tracking for the main computation functions / scopes.

Reviewer 2: and `GEOS_CALIPER_MARK_SCOPE()` then ?

.. dropdown:: Example: Performance instrumentation
   :icon: code

   .. code-block:: c++

      void PhysicsSolverBase::solverStep( ... )
      {
        GEOS_MARK_FUNCTION; // Caliper tracking for entire function

        {
          GEOS_CALIPER_MARK_SCOPE("assemble system");
          Timer timer( m_timers.get_inserted( "assembly" ) );
          assembleSystem();
        }

        {
          GEOS_CALIPER_MARK_SCOPE("linear solve");
          Timer timer( m_timers.get_inserted( "linear solver" ) );
          linearSolve();
        }
      }

Speed Optimization Rules
-----------------------------

- **Hoist Loop Invariants**, move computations that don't change during iterations outside the loop.

> - When it does not critically affect the code architecture and clarity, **Fuse multiple related kernels to reduce memory traffic and launch overhead** (i.e., statistics kernels process all physics field at once).

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
- When it does not critically affect the code architecture and clarity, **fuse multiple related kernels to reduce memory traffic and launch overhead** (i.e., statistics kernels process all physics field at once).
```

- **Optimize Memory Access for Cache and Coalescing**. Access memory sequentially and ensure coalesced access, especially on GPUs.
- **Minimize Host-Device Transfers**. Keep data on the appropriate memory space and minimize transfers.

Memory Management Rules
---------------------------------

Generalities
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

- **Minimize dynamic memory allocation** as much as possible, particularly in performance-critical code,
- For frequently allocated/deallocated objects, **consider memory pools**,
- For containers with known size, **reserve capacity upfront**.

Be Const / Constexpr
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

**Use ``const`` and ``constexpr`` when possible**, enabling:

- **Compiler optimization,** enables better code generation by giving constraints to the code,
- **Code safety,** prevents accidental modification for constant contexts,
- **Show code intention,** make code more readable.

> Also, **Mark methods const if the method is not designed to modify** the object state.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Also, **mark methods const if the method is not designed to modify** the object state.
```

> 

Reviewer 2: Same as above, it sounds like very high level advises, maybe better to relocate in another doc ?

Author: I understand your feeling, and I think the same, strictly forbid useless mutability is a choice, thus a rule.
As it is a rule, it can give strict guidelines when reviewing code.
It is indeed a quite common one, but not enforced in all C++ applications.

I could put the reasons of rules in a foldable block to improve document readability.

I stay open to your feedback, do still you think that it should be moved?

Reviewer 2: I think the document could be two documents or main parts.

- One high level C++ do/don't we choose and want to enforce (not sure it is doable).
- One other that is more Domain Specific because GEOS's is using RAJA+CHAI and macros, and this is design/interface

Author: What do you think of restructuring as follow:

- Code Rules
  - Coding Practices
    - memory
    - perf
    - validation / precision
    - ⁠architecture
  - GEOS Features
    - typing
    - documentation
    - testing
    - logging
    - error managment
    - parallelism
    - perf
    - physics-specific

Reviewer 2: I agree this'd be a good splitting 👍

The difference of the two practices is that passing a pointer means that we consider that the 
underlying object can be null.

Constexpr for Compile-Time Constants
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

**Use ``constexpr`` for values known at compile time**.

The rule is not absolute: when the impact is not significative, and the code needs is getting really unclear, the rule can be ignored.

.. dropdown:: Example: Constexpr usage
   :icon: code

   .. code-block:: c++

      // Compile-time constants
      // A rule of thumb is that oftenly any time a value is constexpr, it can also be static.
      static constexpr localIndex numDimensions = 3;
      static constexpr real64 tolerance = 1.0e-10;
      
      // Constexpr functions (evaluated at compile time when possible)
      constexpr localIndex computeArraySize( localIndex n )
      { return n * n + 2 * n + 1; }

Provide Views to Arrays
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

- When possible, prefer provide views to arrays (to const data if possible).
- This **must** be done especially for RAJA kernels, and views must be **captured by value**.

The rule is generalizable to ``string_view`` for strings, but not applicable in GPU context.

> Why Use Views?

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion

**Rationale:**

```

Author: Isn't that less meaningful?

Reviewer 3: I do not love "Rationale" but it has been used before in the document. I just put it here again for consistency. Feel free to revert, but then keep it consistent throughout.

Author: I added "Why?" dropdown sections for all of those, it is now consistent.

- **No memory allocation:** Views are lightweight references
- **Mutability correctness:** Can provide ``const`` read-only access to inner data
- **GPU compatibility:** Views work seamlessly on device

.. dropdown:: Example: Views for arrays
   :icon: code

   .. code-block:: c++

      // BAD - Creates a copy
      array1d< real64 > copy = originalArray;
      
      // GOOD - Creates a view (lightweight)
      arrayView1d< real64 > view = originalArray.toView();
      
      // GOOD - Const view for read-only access
      arrayView1d< real64 const > constView = originalArray.toViewConst();

> 

Reviewer 2: This might be moved above for more visibility ?

Author: I'm moving it in separate files.

The rule is applicable to ``arrayView*`` and ``string_view``.

.. dropdown:: Example: Lifetime Management
   :icon: code

  .. code-block:: cpp

    // WRONG - returning view of local array
    arrayView1d< real64 > getDanglingView()
    {
      array1d< real64 > tempArray( 100 );
      return tempArray.toView();  // DANGER: tempArray destroyed, view dangles!
    }

    // WRONG - storing view of temporary
    class DataHolder
    {
      arrayView1d< real64 > m_view;
      
      void setData()
      {
        array1d< real64 > temp( 100 );
        m_view = temp.toView();  // DANGER: temp destroyed at end of scope!
      }
    };

    // CORRECT - return the array
    array1d< real64 > getSafeArray()
    {
      array1d< real64 > result( 100 );
      // populate...
      return result;  // Move semantics ensure safety
    }

    // CORRECT - store array, create view when needed
    class SafeDataHolder
    {
      array1d< real64 > m_data;
      
      arrayView1d< real64 > getView() { return m_data.toView(); }
      arrayView1d< real64 const > getViewConst() const { return m_data.toViewConst(); }

>     };

Reviewer 2: detail but with `class` all will be private then ... `struct` ?

Author: added ``public:`` / ``private:``

General Architecture
====================

Avoid Coupling
--------------

Minimize coupling between components when possible **without compromising memory efficiency or execution speed**.

Principles
^^^^^^^^^^

- **Loose coupling:** Components should depend on interfaces, not concrete implementations,

> - **No circular dependancies:** Consider the existing GEOS dependancies to not make components co-dependant (headers inclusion, packages referencing in ``CMakeLists.txt``, avoid tightly coupled objects),

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
- **No circular dependencies:** Consider the existing GEOS dependencies to not make components co-dependent (headers inclusion, packages referencing in ``CMakeLists.txt``, avoid tightly coupled objects),
```

- **Minimize header inclusions and dependancies**.

.. dropdown:: Example: Reducing coupling
   :icon: code

   .. code-block:: c++

      // BAD - Tight coupling to concrete class / implementation
      class SolverA
      {
        void registerSomeMeshData( VTKMesh & mesh );
        void solveHypre( HypreInterface * solver, HypreMatrix * matrix );
      };
      
      // GOOD - Depends on interface
      class SolverB
      {
        void registerSomeMeshData( MeshLevel & mesh ); // More general interface
        void solve( LAInterface * solver, MatrixBase * matrix );
      };
      
      // Performance-critical tight coupling
      template< typename FIELD_T >
      class Kernel
      {
        // Direct access to specific data layout for performance
        void compute( FIELD_T const & data );
      };
      
      template<> Kernel::compute( arrayView1d< double > & field )
      { /* template specialization */ }

      template<> Kernel::compute( arrayView2d< double > & field );
      { /* template specialization */ }

Avoid Globals and Mutable State
--------------------------------

**Minimize mutable global states when possible.**
Prefer passing context explicitly.

> Why to avoid globals:

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion

**Rationale:**

```

Author: Isn't that less meaningful?

Author: I added "Why?" dropdown sections for all of those, it is now standardized.
